Efﬁcient Anomaly Detection of Irregular Sequences in Ct-Echo Model Space
Ao Chen, Xiren Zhou*, Huanhuan Chen*
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
chenao57@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhou0612@ustc.edu.cn, hchen@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
Efﬁcient anomaly detection of irregular sequences, espe-
cially those characterized by non-uniform sampling from dis-
continuous operations or unreliable sensors, presents chal-
lenges across various ﬁelds. In response, this paper introduces
irregular-sequence classiﬁcation in “Ct-Echo Model Space”.
A novel Continuous-time Echo Network (Ct-Echo) is pro-
posed to ﬁt irregular sequences, efﬁciently capturing their in-
herent dynamic characteristics. Ct-Echo utilizes the “Echo”
mechanism, where history information inﬂuences the current
state and diminishes over time, and employs Ordinary Dif-
ferential Equation (ODE) to construct continuous-time tran-
sition of hidden states. Each sequence is individually ﬁtted
via Ct-Echo to derive a readout model. These ﬁtted mod-
els, capturing the dynamic characteristics of the original data,
serve as representations of the corresponding sequences, thus
mapping the original data from the data space to the Ct-Echo
model space. Anomaly detection is further performed in this
model space, evaluating differences between models rather
than directly on the original sequences. Our method enhances
real-time processing and lessens reliance on the amount of la-
beled training data, as demonstrated by experimental studies.
Introduction
Anomaly detection of sequential data typically involves de-
termining whether a collected sequence is normal or be-
longs to a speciﬁc type of anomaly. Traditional techniques
for anomaly detection often presuppose consistent and regu-
lar sampling intervals, an assumption that is not universally
applicable. For example, sensor data collected from mechan-
ical equipment could exhibit irregular sampling or missing
values, stemming from ﬂuctuating operational conditions or
sensor malfunctions. Such irregular sequences, character-
ized by observations at non-uniform intervals, present sig-
niﬁcant analytical challenges (Chowdhury et al. 2023).
Common methods address such irregularities through re-
sampling or interpolation (Sterne et al. 2009), leading to
information loss and potential distortion of original sig-
nals. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have also been
introduced into such tasks (Che et al. 2018), but tend
to be computationally intensive, limiting their applicabil-
*Corresponding Authors: Xiren Zhou, Huanhuan Chen.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Fitting suitable 
models to represent 
original sequences
Model Space
Data Space
Figure 1: The MBM represents each data instance with a
model that is suitably ﬁtted to capture the dynamical charac-
teristic inherent in the original data instance, which further
serves as the data representation for further classiﬁcation.
ity in time-sensitive scenarios. Besides, ODE-based meth-
ods, such as ODE-RNN (Rubanova, Chen, and Duvenaud
2019) and Neural Controlled Differential Equations (Neu-
ral CDE) (Kidger et al. 2020; Jhin, Lee, and Park 2023),
have proven effective for handling irregular sequences
through continuous-time networks. Nevertheless, existing
ODE-based methods grapple with high computational com-
plexity and extensive network parameters, hindering their
applicability in real-time or data-scarce tasks.
Recently, Model-Based Methods (MBMs) have emerged
as promising solutions for anomaly detection in sequen-
tial data (Chen et al. 2023). MBMs, as Figure 1, represent
each data instance through a suitably ﬁtted model that cap-
tures the data-inherent dynamic characteristics. This rep-
resentation marks a transformation from data-space pro-
cessing to model-space analysis. Representing original data
with dynamic-captured models enables the application of
learning algorithms to the models rather than the origi-
nal data (Chen et al. 2013). MBMs have proven computa-
tional efﬁciency and reduced data dependency across var-
ious time-series classiﬁcation and anomaly detection tasks
(Chen, Zhou, and Chen 2024; Liu, Zhou, and Chen 2024).
However, existing models (e.g. Echo-State-Network(ESN)-
based) used for data ﬁtting and representation maintain a
uniform approach to state updates across time steps, failing
to handle data with irregular sampling or missing values.
Addressing the above considerations, this paper proposes
to conduct anomaly detection of irregular sequences within
“Ct-Echo Model Space”. The Continuous-Time Echo Net-
work (Ct-Echo) is introduced to ﬁt irregular sequences, ef-
ﬁciently capturing the data-inherent dynamic characteris-
The Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-25)
15731
