Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Transportation Research Part C
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trc
Stacked bidirectional and unidirectional LSTM recurrent neural
network for forecasting network-wide traffic state with missing
values
Zhiyong Cui, Ruimin Ke, Ziyuan Pu, Yinhai Wang⁎
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Recurrent neural network
Bidirectional LSTM
Backward dependency
Network-wide traffic prediction
Missing data
Data imputation
A B S T R A C T
Short-term traffic forecasting based on deep learning methods, especially recurrent neural net-
works (RNN), has received much attention in recent years. However, the potential of RNN-based
models in traffic forecasting has not yet been fully exploited in terms of the predictive power of
spatial–temporal data and the capability of handling missing data. In this paper, we focus on
RNN-based models and attempt to reformulate the way to incorporate RNN and its variants into
traffic prediction models. A stacked bidirectional and unidirectional LSTM network architecture
(SBU-LSTM) is proposed to assist the design of neural network structures for traffic state fore-
casting. As a key component of the architecture, the bidirectional LSTM (BDLSM) is exploited to
capture the forward and backward temporal dependencies in spatiotemporal data. To deal with
missing values in spatial–temporal data, we also propose a data imputation mechanism in the
LSTM structure (LSTM-I) by designing an imputation unit to infer missing values and assist traffic
prediction. The bidirectional version of LSTM-I is incorporated in the SBU-LSTM architecture.
Two real-world network-wide traffic state datasets are used to conduct experiments and pub-
lished to facilitate further traffic prediction research. The prediction performance of multiple
types of multi-layer LSTM or BDLSTM models is evaluated. Experimental results indicate that the
proposed SBU-LSTM architecture, especially the two-layer BDLSTM network, can achieve su-
perior performance for the network-wide traffic prediction in both accuracy and robustness.
Further, comprehensive comparison results show that the proposed data imputation mechanism
in the RNN-based models can achieve outstanding prediction performance when the model’s
input data contains different patterns of missing values.
1. Introduction
Short-term traffic forecasting based on data-driven models for ITS applications has great influence on the overall performance of
modern transportation systems Vlahogianni et al. (2014). In the last three decades, a large number of methods have been proposed
for traffic forecasting in terms of predicting speed, volume, density and travel time. Studies in this area normally focus on the
methodology components, aiming at developing different models to improve prediction accuracy, efficiency, or robustness. Previous
literature Vlahogianni et al. (2014), Ma et al. (2015) indicates that the existing models can be roughly divided into two categories, i.e.
classical statistical methods and computational intelligence (CI) approaches. Classical statistical models, such as Autoregressive
Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) and its variants Williams and Hoel (2003), Chandra and Al-Deek (2009), have made great
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2020.102674
Received 11 March 2019; Received in revised form 30 March 2020; Accepted 20 May 2020
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: zhiyongc@uw.edu (Z. Cui), ker27@uw.edu (R. Ke), ziyuanpu@uw.edu (Z. Pu), yinhai@uw.edu (Y. Wang).
Transportation Research Part C 118 (2020) 102674
Available online 10 July 2020
0968-090X/ © 2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
T
