4270
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Multi-View Integrative Attention-Based Deep
Representation Learning for Irregular Clinical
Time-Series Data
Yurim Lee
, Eunji Jun
, Jaehun Choi
, and Heung-Il Suk
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Electronic health record (EHR) data are sparse
and irregular as they are recorded at irregular time inter-
vals, and different clinical variables are measured at each
observation point. In this work, to handle irregular mul-
tivariate time-series data, we consider the human knowl-
edge of the aspects to be measured and time to measure
them in different situations, known as multi-view features,
which are indirectly represented in the data. We propose
a scheme to realize multi-view features integration learn-
ing via a self-attention mechanism. Speciﬁcally, we devise
a novel multi-integration attention module (MIAM) to ex-
tract complex information that is inherent in irregular time-
series data. We explicitly learn the relationships among
the observed values, missing indicators, and time interval
between the consecutive observations in a simultaneous
manner. In addition, we build an attention-based decoder
as a missing value imputer that helps empower the rep-
resentation learning of the interrelations among multi-view
observations for the prediction task this decoder operates
only in the training phase so that the ﬁnal model is im-
plemented in an imputation-free manner. We validated the
effectiveness of our method over the public MIMIC-III and
PhysioNet challenge 2012 datasets by comparing with and
outperforming the state-of-the-art methods in three down-
stream tasks i.e., prediction of the in-hospital mortality, pre-
diction of the length of stay, and phenotyping. Moreover, we
conduct a layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) analysis
based on case studies to highlight the explainability of the
trained model.
Manuscript received 14 October 2021; revised 2 February 2022 and
6 April 2022; accepted 26 April 2022. Date of publication 5 May 2022;
date of current version 9 August 2022. This work was supported in part
by the Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning
& Evaluation (IITP) funded by the Korea government (MSIT) under
Grants 2021-0-00982 for the Development of the multi-center distributed
intelligence reinforcement federation technology for cooperating optimal
treatments, and 2019-0-00079 for the Department of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (Korea University). (Yurim Lee and Eunji Jun contributed equally
to this work.) (Corresponding author: Heung-Il Suk.)
Yurim Lee and Eunji Jun are with the Department of Brain and Cog-
nitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
(e-mail: yurimalee@korea.ac.kr; ejjun92@gmail.com).
Jaehun Choi is with the Medical Information Research Section, Intel-
ligent Convergence Research Laboratory, Electronics and Telecommu-
nications Research Institute (ETRI), Daejeon 34129, Republic of Korea
(e-mail: jhchoi@etri.re.kr).
Heung-Il Suk is with the Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the
Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul
02841, Republic of Korea (e-mail: hisuk@korea.ac.kr).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2022.3172549, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JBHI.2022.3172549
Index Terms—Electronic health records, bioinformatics,
irregular
time
series
modeling,
deep
learning,
self-
attention.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE electronic health record (EHR) represents a collection
ofpatients’healthdatasuchascodeddiagnoses,vitalsigns,
lab test records, procedures, and textual narratives. In the recent
decade, signiﬁcant progress has been made in developing deep
learning models using multivariate EHR time series owing to the
abundance of health big datasets. However, learning the appro-
priate EHR representations is challenging for many deep learn-
ing models as the EHR is irregularly sampled; in particular, the
observations are measured at different time points determined by
the type of measurement, patient’s health status, and availability
of clinical staff. Owing to the different number of observations
and lack of temporal alignment across the data, machine learning
models that assume a ﬁxed-dimensional feature space cannot be
applied.
The common deep learning approaches for handling the ir-
regularly sampled time series, which are based on convolutional
neural network (CNN), recurrent neural network (RNN), and
recently attention-based methods, have demonstrated their su-
periority in healthcare target tasks. Speciﬁcally, CNN is usually
applied to capture the local temporal characteristics of clinical
data by using the predeﬁned kernel sizes on a small chunk of
EHR features to identify local motifs, i.e., co-occurrences of
diseases [1] and patient similarity [2]. However, although these
approaches can model the local temporal dependencies in the
predeﬁned kernel size, the modeling of global dependencies is
challenging.
RNN-based methods have been the defacto methodology to
address clinical time series data, as RNNs can manage various
lengths of sequential data. However, conventional RNN methods
are designed to handle data with a constant time interval between
consecutive time series, leading to suboptimal performance in
the case of an irregular time interval. To address this challenge,
the widely used approach is to convert irregularly sampled time
series data into regularly sampled time series, i.e., temporal
discretization [3], [4] and feed this ﬁxed-dimensional vector to
the RNNs. Nonetheless, this process involves ad-hoc choices
regarding the window size and aggregation function that address
values falling in the same window. Similar to discretization
methods, interpolation methods [4], [5] require speciﬁcation of
2168-2194 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on August 14,2025 at 08:41:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
