LEE et al.: MULTI-VIEW INTEGRATIVE ATTENTION-BASED DEEP REPRESENTATION LEARNING
4275
for the marked values only by Mimp as:
Limp = 1
N
N

n=1

X(n) ⊙M(n)
imp −ˆX(n) ⊙M(n)
imp
2
.
(15)
By introducing the imputation loss in the objective function, the
imputer provides auxiliary information to achieve the optimal
prediction result.
E. Composite Loss
The composite loss is deﬁned by accumulating the prediction
and imputation losses as L = λpredLpred + λimpLimp where λprd
and λimp are hyperparameters that control the ratio between two
losses. We optimize all the parameters of our model in an end-
to-end manner via the composite loss L. The overall training
process the proposed method for the in-hospital mortality task
is summarized as Algorithm 1. The auxiliary imputer operates
only in the training phase.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS
In this section, we evaluated our proposed method for the
downstream tasks illustrated in Section III-C. Each of the tasks
is learned separately in a single-task manner.
1) Dataset and Preprocessing: We conducted experiments
on two datasets: MIMIC-III1 and PhysioNet 2012 challenge2
datasets. MIMIC-III dataset consists of medical records of
13,998 patients collected at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center. We used 99 time series measurements for each pa-
tient. The number of irregular time points ranged from 1 to
247 (m ± σ = 49.29 ± 35.90). The selected time series was
scarcely observed leading to a missing rate of approximately
90%. In terms of the in-hospital mortality label, the ratio of
1,181 positive (dead in hospital) to 12,817 negative (alive in-
hospital) was approximately 1:10.8, and the LOS ranged from
0.0004 to 86.85 days (m ± σ = 3.81 ± 4.86). The phenotyping
label included 25 disease conditions with 12, 8, 5 conditions
being critical (such as respiratory/renal failure), chronic (such
as diabetes or atherosclerosis), mixed conditions, respectively.
The PhysioNet 2012 challenge dataset consists of 35 different
time-series measurements and ﬁve general descriptors for 4,000
critical care patients with at least 48 hours of hospital stay. We
used 35 time-series variables without the general descriptor of
3,997 patients with at least one observation time. The number of
irregular time points ranged from 1 to 202 (m ± σ = 73.87 ±
23.06).Themissingratewasapproximately80.5%,themortality
labels were imbalanced at a ratio of approximately 1:6 between
554 positive and 3,443 negative cases, and LOS label varied
from 0 to 105 (m ± σ = 13.45 ± 12.24).
In terms of data preprocessing, because each variable had a
different range, all the inputs were ﬁrst winsorized to remove
outliers and then z-normalized using the global mean and stan-
dard deviation from the entire training set to achieve a zero mean
and unit variance in a variable-wise manner.
1Available at https://mimic.physionet.org/.
2Available at https://physionet.org/content/challenge-2012/.
2) Performance Evaluation: We reported the average results
from 5-fold cross validation, in comparison with other SOTA
methods in the literature. For the in-hospital mortality pre-
diction, i.e., binary classiﬁcation, we used the area under the
ROC curve (AUC) and area under the precision–recall curve
(AUPRC) as the evaluation metrics. To forecast LOS, i.e., the
regression task, we used the root mean squared error (RMSE)
and mean absolute error (MAE) as the evaluation metrics. For
phenotyping, i.e., multi-label classiﬁcation, we used the mean
AUC (mAUC) and mean AUPRC (mAUPRC).
In addition, we conducted exhaustive ablation studies to in-
vestigate the inﬂuence of different experimental design options
in terms of the multi-view integration module and auxiliary
imputer in the proposed method for each task. We validated
the effectiveness of multi-view integration by considering ﬁve
scenarios, i.e., single view (X), double views (M + Δ, X + M,
X + Δ), and triple views (X + M + Δ).
3) Experimental Settings: We trained our models using the
rectiﬁed Adam (RAdam) optimizer [25] with an initial learning
rate of 0.005 and multiplicative decay of 0.2 for every 10 epochs
for 60 epochs with early stopping of 20 patience by using mini-
batches of 64 samples. We chose the ﬁnal optimal model based
on the performance on the validation set.
For the MIMIC-III dataset, the model achieved its best perfor-
mance for binary and multi-label classiﬁcation at self-attention
block with eight heads with dk = dv = 128, and dF F N = 128,
where dk, dv, dFFN are the dimension of the key, value, and FFN,
respectively, in all the self-attention blocks of the MIAM and
imputer. For regression, the highest performance was achieved
using a self-attention block with eight heads of dk = dv = 64,
and dF F N = 128. For the PhysioNet 2012 challenge dataset,
we observed the highest performance at with a self-attention
block with eight heads of dk = dv = 64, and dFFN = 128 for
binary and multi-label classiﬁcation. For regression, the model
exhibited the highest performance with at self-attention block
with four heads dk = dv = 64, and dF F N = 64. The β and γ in
focal loss were chosen 7 and 0.15, respectively. The composite
loss parameters λimp and λpred for the classiﬁcation task were 10
and 1, respectively. In the regression task, λimp and λprd were
both 1. For the activation function, we used LeakyReLU and
Tanh for binary and multi-label classiﬁcation, respectively.
We validated the efﬁcacy of the proposed method by com-
paring it with SOTA methods categorized as recurrence-based,
interpolation-based, and attention-based methods as shown in
Table I and Table II.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Experimental Results
Table I and Table II compare the results of the proposed
method with those of the competing methods for mortality
prediction on the PhysioNet 2012 challenge and MIMIC-III
datasets. The results of the ablation studies for ﬁve scenarios,
i.e., single view (X), double views (M + Δ, X + M, X + Δ),
and triple views (X + M + Δ), are presented in Table III and
Table IV. The effect of the attention-based imputer was explored
in Table V and Table VI. Lastly, we compared the proposed
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on August 14,2025 at 08:41:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
