4278
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Fig. 3.
Visualization of (top row) normalized raw data for observation (X), missing indicator (M), and time interval (Δ), (middle row) relevance
score map for observation (RX), missing indicator (RM), and time interval (RΔ), and (bottom row) bar graph for changes of the highlighted
relevance scores on their time points (GCS: Glasgow coma score, HR: heart rate, HCT: hematocrit, SysABP: systolic arterial blood pressure) of a
patient with high mortality (ˆy = 0.7922). Here, we visualized only positive relevance scores for simplicity.
results. Combination of these results and those of previous
ablation study, indicate that the time interval (Δ) provides key
information regarding the missingness, although its importance
weakens when it is used to generate the missing pattern with the
missing indicator (M).
The results in Table V and Table VI showed that the proposed
model built with the attention-based imputer achieved a higher
performance than that without the imputer in both datasets. The
auxiliary imputer helps enhance the representational power of
the interrelations among multi-view observations for the predic-
tion task.
Furthermore, we compared our proposed approach to the
case of using the imputed data by the BRITS imputer [17] as
the SOTA imputation method and the auxiliary imputer for the
PhysioNet and MIMIC-III dataset in the Table VII and Table
VIII. The imputation (dotted line in Fig. 2) was also conducted
in the test phase. The result obtained using the imputed data
by the auxiliary imputer (Auxiliary Imp.) was superior to that
of the proposed approach (No Imp.), and the (BRITS Imp.)
achieved the highest performance. However, the imputation-
based methods incurred signiﬁcantly higher computing costs
compared to the proposed method. Speciﬁcally, our method
demanded 4.1091 × 1010 FLOPs (ﬂoating point operations per
second), whereas the (BRITS Imp.) required 7.2526 × 1011
FLOPs due to their RNN-based imputation process. Considering
the trade-off between the computing costs and performance,
these results validated the effectiveness of the proposed method
in downstream tasks.
Notably, these experimental results validated the efﬁcacy of
the proposed method that learns the multi-view representation
of irregular time series data and their deep integration with
the self-attention mechanism, and further builds an auxiliary
missingdataimputer,consideringitssuperiorperformanceinthe
downstreamtask.Furthermore,theablationresultsindicatedthat
the use of explicit imputation data helped enhance the prediction
task performance to some extent compared to that when the
imputation was not used, although the computational cost of the
proposed method was signiﬁcantly lower than that of the other
approaches. Thus, the proposed approach in which the auxiliary
imputer is used only in the training phase can adequately model
irregular time series data.
Regarding the ﬁnal representation, for which we used an
average pooling, we compared with other strategies in Supple-
mentary S2.
C. Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) Analysis
In this study, to demonstrate the validity of our novel multi-
view attention method in real-world risk prediction tasks, we
applied the layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) method [26]
that has been widely employed to highlight the explainability of
a learned model among attribution methods [27]. Speciﬁcally,
weappliedLRP-αβ [26],[27],whichtreatspositiveandnegative
contributions in an asymmetric manner instead of vanilla LRP,
and obtained the relevance scores.
We analyzed the in-hospital mortality prediction task over
the PhysioNet 2012 challenge dataset. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
calculated the relevance scores for each patient via the LRP and
normalized them to a range of (−1, 1). Next, we extracted the
strongly highlighted variables and time points that showed high
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on August 14,2025 at 08:41:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
