LEE et al.: MULTI-VIEW INTEGRATIVE ATTENTION-BASED DEEP REPRESENTATION LEARNING
4279
Fig. 4.
Visualization of (top) normalized raw data for observation (X), missing indicator (M), and time interval (Δ), (middle) relevance score map
for observation (RX), missing indicator (RM), and time interval (RΔ), and (bottom) bar graph for changes of the highlighted relevance scores on
their time points (HCT: hematocrit, RespRate: respiration rate, BUN: blood urea nitrogen) of a patient with low mortality (ˆy = 0.1542). Here, we
visualized only positive relevance scores for simplicity.
relevance scores, i.e., those with scores greater than μ + 1.2σ.
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show the raw observation, missing indicators,
and time interval (X, M, Δ), their corresponding relevance
score map (RX, RM, RΔ), and the changes of highlighted
relevance scores over the time points for the two patients with
the highest and lowest probability among test samples with a
ground truth label of 1, i.e. mortality.
1) Case I: Patient With the Highest Predicted Mortality Prob-
ability: Fig. 3 shows the input data and relevance scores of a
patient with the highest predicted probability for in-hospital
mortality. The relevance scores of all the input data showed
relatively similar patterns, especially between RX and RM. It
can be inferred that the model effectively employed both the
observation and missingness information during the decision
process. The variables with high relevance score were Hemat-
ocrit (HCT), Glasgow coma score (GCS), systolic arterial blood
pressure (SysABP), and heart rate (HR). HCT, which refers to
the volume percentage of red blood cells in blood, is an indicator
of heart failure in the ICU [28]. The raw signal at the time
point of the high relevance scores showed a distinct change,
affecting the increase in the mortality. The GCS is a clinical
scale used to reliably measure a patient’s level of consciousness
after brain injury. The frequent measurement of the GCS and
its changes indicate the severity of the patient’s status, which
is related to the increase in the mortality of the patient. Lastly,
SysABP and HR presented high relevance scores over the time
points at which they were frequently measured. The frequent
measurement of both variables may indicate deterioration of
the patient’s condition, leading to the increased in-hospital
mortality.
2) Case II: Patient With the Lowest Predicted Mortality Prob-
ability: Fig. 4 shows the input data and relevance scores of a
patient with a mispredicted low probability, despite an actual
ground truth label of 1. The variables with high relevance scores
were respiration rate (RespRate), blood urea nitrogen (BUN),
and HCT. RespRate indicates the number of breaths per minute,
and thus, a rapid change in this value is considered abnormal.
However, the relevance score of the patient was high when
the RespRate exhibited minor changes. The BUN indicates the
amount of urea nitrogen, a waste product of the digestion of
protein, found in the blood. Although the BUN is the indicator
for renal failure, it is not a distinct indicator of high in-hospital
mortality.
The relevance scores of the patient with high mortality pre-
diction were high in variables that are directly related to the mor-
tality prediction, as well as in the time points involving distinct
changes in the values. However, the patient with low mortality
prediction showed a high relevance score for the variables or
time points with low correlation to the in-hospital mortality. In
addition, the experimental results for the high similarity of the
relevance scores for the observations, missing indicators, and
time interval data showed that the use of the representation of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Chalmers University of Technology Sweden. Downloaded on August 14,2025 at 08:41:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
